Narrator:
We've long known that
what happens to us in childhood
can leave a lasting imprint
on the adults we become.
The places we live.
The people we know.
The best of times...
and the worst.
They all somehow
become part of us.
Now, a new science is telling us
that our experiences go even
deeper than we thought.
It happens on the genetic level.
Experiences,
scientists have learned,
can leave chemical marks
on our DNA.
Those marks can switch
genes on or off,
changing the way our bodies
and our brains function.
The changes can prime us
to thrive,
or they can impede development
affecting health
and well-being for life.
Woman:
We're talking about
processes here that
are at a biological level.
It just gets under the skin
in a variety of ways.
Narrator:
These chemical tags are set
in place during critical periods
of biological change.
Woman:
There's these special
vulnerabilities in utero,
during pregnancy,
in infancy, in early childhood.
Narrator:
Everything in
an infant's experience
can help or hinder-
diet...
environmental toxins...
housing, safety...
even the parents' stress levels.
These new discoveries
have profound social
and political implications.
Because if social influences can
alter the way our genes work,
then early environments
can result in biological
obstacles to success.
Woman:
The poorest kids in our society,
not surprisingly, are
the most vulnerable
to just about every health
outcome we can measure.
These are fairly healthy young
children who, with time,
are going to suffer
the consequences
of their social class.
Narrator:
New evidence shows
that social
and economic stressors
can affect children in infancy,
causing changes
in gene expression,
changes that may last
a lifetime.
Woman:
It affects
their way of thinking,
it affects their views
of themselves,
it affects their social
relationships.
Narrator:
But along with
a new understanding
of how early experience
influences development,
this science brings hope.
Improved social conditions,
the evidence shows,
can actually provide
the biological foundation
for lives that are healthier,
and more likely to thrive.
Woman:
The science is clear about this.
What we need is for the policy
to follow the science
and get us to more protective
environments for children.
Narrator:
Some of the first clues
that our lived
experience could alter
the way our genes work
came from a set of experiments
involving some genetically
identical mice,
that somehow weren't identical.
Dolinoy:
The brown pseudo Agouti mouse
weighs around 27 grams.
Here is the yellow mouse
that weighs around 52 grams.
Narrator:
How could it be that some mice
are brown and thin,
others yellow and obese,
when they all share
the exact same DNA?
It's what their mothers were fed
while they were pregnant.
Some were fed pellets
rich in methyl groups,
a molecule commonly found
in fruits and vegetables.
Those mice were more likely to
give birth to brown skinny pups.
But mothers fed a diet
with fewer methyl groups
were more likely
to give birth to pups
that were yellow and obese.
Whoops! Tipped the scale.
Narrator:
These studies
were first conducted
at Duke University
under biologist Randy Jirtle.
Jirtle's team,
including Dana Dolinoy,
zeroed in on one particular gene
in search of an explanation.
The Agouti gene codes
for yellow fur.
Curiously, it's also related
to obesity.
Jirtle's team found
that the methyl groups
fed to the pregnant mothers
passed through to
the developing pups
and attached to
their Agouti genes.
It's a process called
methyl ati on.
Dolinoy:
DNA methylation is the addition
of a single carbon
in the form of a methyl group.
So this is a carbon
and three hydrogens
that sits down on DNA
and shuts genes off.
Narrator:
With the gene on, or active,
more mice were born
yellow and grew obese.
With the gene silenced,
more mice were born
brown and remained thin.
Same genes,
very different results.
The difference is whether
particular genes
are switched on or off,
expressed or silenced.
The genes we inherit
are fixed for life.
But there's an entire
network of molecules
that influences which
genes are expressed
by making them active,
or shutting them down,
like a volume control
or a dimmer switch.
It's called the epigenome.
Well, literally it just means
"in addition to,"
or "above" the genome.
Narrator:
The epigenome.
It's a system
of molecular switches
that interacts with our genes.
Scientists are only
just beginning
to understand
how it functions.
Some epigenome molecules
sit literally on top of genes,
fixed like barnacles
on the hull of a ship,
working to switch
genes on or off.
When we talk about epigenetics,
we're talking a collection
of biochemical signals
that control the way in
which the genome operates.
We each have our own
genetic make-up.
That's fixed from the time
we're conceived forever.
What changes though
is the activity of genes.
Narrator:
The pattern of gene activity
can be absolutely critical,
even producing differences
in the form and
function of cells.
Meaney:
If you think about it,
your body is made up of
over 200 different cell types.
But they all have exactly
the same DNA.
The same genes
are in your liver cell,
brain cell, your muscle cells.
So something has to happen
to allow these cells
to become specialized
to do what they're supposed
to do in your body.
And that's where epigenetics
comes in.
Narrator:
Epigenetic signals also turn on
and off some of the genes
that are constantly active
throughout our lives,
like those involved in appetite,
disease-fighting, fear, focus,
elation, even love.
n the mice,
the Agouti gene influences
not only fur color,
but also body size and shape.
Different epigenetic settings
result in different appetites,
metabolic rates,
and fat storage.
That accounts for the radically
different weights.
It's a revolution in thinking
about how genes work.
DNA, it turns out,
is not the master blueprint.
So now you start thinking of DNA
not just as an inevitable
bank of information,
but you start thinking
of it as a molecule
like any other molecule,
that can be more or less active.
Narrator:
If gene activity is so sensitive
to a naturally
occurring molecule,
like a methyl group,
could the synthetic substances
of our modern world
be affecting the genome as well?
In a follow-up experiment,
Dolinoy fed her pregnant
Bisphenol A, or BPA.
It's a chemical commonly
found in plastics,
and associated with adverse
health effects in humans.
This time, she found
less methylation,
more active Agouti genes
and more yellow obese pups
born to mice fed BPA.
And these pups had
a host of health problems.
Dolinoy:
These epigenetic changes
were also correlated with
an increased risk of things
like heart disease
and metabolic syndrome
and obesity later in life.
Narrator:
Then Dolinoy wanted to see
if she could protect the mice
from the effects of BPA.
So she exposed pregnant
mice to both BPA
and a diet rich
in methyl groups.
Again, the genome responded.
The mice were born
brown and skinny.
This showed,
at least in a mouse model,
that nutritional interventions
could counteract
the effects of toxicants.
This also shows, at least
in this experiment,
that theepigenome
is quite plastic
and adaptable
during development.
Narrator:
The idea that the epigenome,
and therefore gene expression,
could be modified
by environment
was a radical finding.
But the Agouti mice
were studied under controlled
laboratory conditions.
Human environments
are far more complex.
A child's environment is
everything in his or her world.
Woman:
Neighborhoods are
defining for them.
It's where they live.
It's where they go
outside and play.
It's where they see
their friends.
The amenities, the good things,
the local park,
the sidewalks that you
can ride your bike on
are really wonderful
things for children.
The disamenities,
things like litter
and abandoned vehicles
and overgrown lots and crime,
those have an equally
important effect on children.
Narrator:
It's not just
the physical environment.
For a young child,
the social and economic
environment is also key.
Personal relationships...
exposure to stressors...
feelings of safety
or insecurity...
(baby crying)
all of these can get
under the skin.
An adverse social environment,
the science indicates,
can change a baby's epigenome
just as toxic chemicals can.
In the early 1990s
at McGill University
in Montreal,
neurobiologist Michael Meaney
set out to understand
how stressful conditions
in early life
could have effects
that last a lifetime.
Meany:
The first thing we wanted to do
is to look at
an environmental influence
that we know
has a profound effect.
So we looked at maternal care.
Narrator:
Meaney and his team,
including then-doctoral
student Darlene Francis,
observed that some adult rats
seemed to be more
skittish and fearful,
more stressed, than others.
(thump)
They went looking for factors
in the rats' early
social environment
that might be a clue
to the difference.
Francis:
We observed hundreds of litters,
hundreds of different
types of behaviors.
And then when you put
all of the data together,
the most powerful
predictor of stress profiles
in those babies growing up
was the amount
of licking and grooming
they had received
from their mothers.
Narrator:
Rat mothers typically lick
and groom their pups.
But some do it more
than others.
And the difference between
high-licking mothers
and low-licking mothers
was reflected in their pups'
behavior as adults.
The team found that rat pups
that were licked
and groomed more
grew up to approach the
world with greater confidence.
Francis:
So these animals we put them
in a little bit scary,
big empty open tub.
They explore
the outer perimeter,
they explore
the inner perimeter,
they're doing what rats do,
which is explore.
Narrator:
Not so for the low-licked rats.
Francis:
Animals that were raised
in low licking and grooming
environments, hug the walls,
they don't explore so much.
They have significantly
impaired exploration profiles
or behaviors.
We don't want
to stress them out.
Narrator:
The low-licked pups
grew up to be vigilant
and hypersensitive to
noise or movement,
on constant alert for threats,
even when there were none.
n both rats and humans,
the stress response evolved
to help us survive danger.
It begins with stress hormones
like Cortisol,
flooding the brain in response
to threats and challenges.
A cascade of changes puts
the body on red-alert,
and we're prepared to fight
or flee on a moment's notice.
When the threat has passed,
specialized proteins called
glucocorticoid receptors
bind with the Cortisol,
neutralizing it
and shutting down
the stress response.
But the low-licked rats
seemed unable to calm down.
Meaney's team
wanted to know why.
So they looked at the regions
of the rats' brains
that process stress.
Woman:
So we're looking at
rat brain sections, and we're
slicing hippocampus sections.
Narrator:
When the team compared
glucocorticoid receptors
in the brains of high
and low-licking rats,
they had an answer.
Francis:
The red represents expression
of the glucocorticoid
receptor message.
You can see with
the naked eye,
significantly less expression
of the glucocorticoid receptor
in offspring raised
in low-licking
and grooming environments.
And that's crucial
for dampening down
further activation
of the stress response.
Narrator:
Despite being genetically identical,
the pups that
had been licked less
had fewer glucocorticoid
receptors.
With fewer receptors,
their stress response
remained high.
These rats stay on a fight
or flight hair trigger.
Meaney turned to a second
research group
to study the genes responsible
for producing these receptors.
n the low-licked rats,
they found that methyl groups
had attached to many genes,
covering them up
and preventing them
from doing their work.
The genes themselves
hadn't changed.
But with methyl groups
in place,
the genes can't produce as
many glucocorticoid receptors
and the result
is ongoing stress.
This enduring physical change
in the brain structure
of the rats
was brought about
by purely social factors
in early life-
less licking and grooming.
Meaney and his colleagues
found that the changes
typically last for
the lifetime of the rats.
And they went far beyond
the hypervigilance
he initially observed.
Meaney:
You can see changes
in the actual metabolic
function of the animals.
For example, animals
that are licked more
are less likely
to become obese.
And we know that in part
that's because
of the way the brain
is then guiding
the endocrine systems
that determine
metabolic health.
So mother's licking
is actually shaping
an enormous array of traits
that are then
established in the pup
and carried into adulthood.
Narrator:
Another group of researchers
wanted to know
why some rat mothers
might provide less care
than others.
And it turned out that
a social condition
could influence
that difference as well.
Francis:
We're watching this mother
do the best that she can.
Her stress hormone levels
are through the roof.
Woman:
It's like trying to build a nest
in the middle of the desert.
Not the most
hospitable place.
Narrator:
Rat mothers like to build nests
for their pups
with soft materials.
But these moms have
only been given hard,
scratchy, inferior
building supplies.
It's a demonstration
of an experiment
first conducted by David Swett.
Francis:
They really devote
a lot of resources
to trying to build nests,
because we took their
nesting materials away,
horrible researchers
that we are.
I think it's obvious that
she's trying really hard,
and she's tried really hard
to provide as much of a nest
as she can to her litter.
Narrator:
The stressed mothers
spend as much time with
their pups as unstressed moms.
But they lick and groom
far less.
The strain of providing
shelter with few resources
impeded the rats' efforts
to care for their young.
Francis:
It wasn't a time issue,
but the quality of
what they were doing
and how they were interacting
with their pups was different,
and we were able
to identify that
that directly related to
measures of the stress response.
Narrator:
A stressful environment led
to a low-licking mother.
That low-licking mother
produced offspring
that had trouble turning
their stress response off.
And this triggered a cascade
of health
and behavioral effects.
But laboratory rats
are one thing.
Would the same pattern
hold true for humans?
Many American families face
an increasing load of stressors.
More demands
from their employers.
Less job security.
Less time.
Living paycheck to paycheck.
Anxiety about the future.
Could these growing stressors
affect not only the parents,
but their children as well?
In 1990, a team of researchers
at the University of Wisconsin
began to measure
the stress levels
in working families that
were about to have children.
Some were well paid
and relatively comfortable,
others less so.
But the strain of coping
with an increasingly
precarious middle class life
was taking a toll on many.
Woman:
They were stressed, you know,
economically, they were stressed
by having to work two jobs,
just on and on and on
with the stresses
those families
were experiencing.
So we turned to them
to looking at the long-term
development on the children.
Narrator:
Might parental stress
alter the developmental paths
of their young children?
Essex and her team
followed the families
for more than two decades,
charting stress levels,
behaviors, school performance,
and other indicators
in the children.
Stress was measured both
by what the families reported
and by the level
of stress hormones
in their blood and saliva.
The results were clear -
the higher a parent's stress
early in a child's life,
the more stressed
the children became
and the more that showed up
in their behavior later in life.
Essex:
If you imagine a child
that you're looking at
in a kindergarten class,
it's that child that, you know,
is kind of anxious,
isn't interacting
with kids very well,
but is aggressive
and is impulsive.
Narrator:
As the kids grew,
their stress levels
remained high,
even if their parents'
stress level had fallen.
n adolescence,
their lives still reflected
their early life experience.
Essex:
They have worse
peer relationships.
They have more problems
with their teachers.
So that is all kind of part
of the package.
I mean it has very
long-term consequences
that can go into adulthood.
I mean the development of
substance use, teen pregnancies.
Narrator:
How was it that
the early experience
of their parents' stress
had such a lasting impact
on the children?
The answer was hiding
in their epigenome.
Essex had been
collecting cheek swabs
and saliva samples from
her subjects for many years
so she could test
for stress hormones.
A leading molecular biologist
heard about her work
and realized
that those samples
also contained a
treasure trove of genetic
and epigenetic evidence.
Man:
She had done
absolutely fascinating and
groundbreaking work.
And so we teamed up
and we got enough money
to epigenetically profile
100 children in her cohort.
What we found is that
in these sixteen-year-old
kids or adolescents,
their dimmer switch pattern
could be correlated
to the level of maternal
stress during infancy.
Narrator:
Koborhad discovered
epigenetic patterns
in the teenagers
that corresponded
to the amount of stress
their parents had experienced
15 years earlier.
This was a first -
hard evidence that simply
living in a home full of stress
could modify the epigenome
of infants.
The second-hand stress
they experienced as infants
had increased their risk for
long-term behavioral problems.
The struggles of working
families in America,
the study showed,
had exacted a price on
the lives of their children
through changed
epigenetic settings.
It was an eerie replay of
the earlier study of rats.
n both cases,
severe and consistent
maternal stress in infancy
had resulted in persistent
epigenetic changes in offspring.
And the children suffered the
same host of knock-on effects
as the rats.
Essex:
Over a lifetime
it wears and tears
on your system.
You end up with association
with cardiovascular problems,
with all kinds of psychiatric
problems, with obesity,
and a wide range of health and
mental health kinds of problems.
Narrator:
If the development
of the mostly
middle class children
of the Wisconsin study
can be altered...
what about the millions
of American children
further down the
socio-economic pyramid?
In societies around the globe,
researchers have found
a correlation
between family wealth
and well-being.
The more affluent and high
status the families, on average,
the fewer adversities their
children are exposed to,
and the better their outcomes.
While many factors contribute
to this wealth-health gradient,
the Wisconsin study
raises the question
of whether epigenetic changes
might occur throughout
the population
on the same sliding scale
that connects wealth, power
and status to well-being.
The idea is unproven
but provocative.
Because if social
and economic adversities
can alter theepigenome
along a continuum
corresponding to social status,
then addressing
social conditions
becomes not just
a moral question,
but a necessity for the success
of our society.
Twenty-five percent
of U.S. children,
one out of every four,
are born into poverty.
They live with food
and housing insecurity
and with safety concerns.
They are exposed not only to
more environmental hazards,
but more noise, more hardship,
more violence,
and more social stressors
than their wealthier peers.
And in the middle class,
so many families are
increasingly pressed for time,
for money,
and for resources.
Could the epigenomes
of these children be modified
by their social and
economic conditions
just as those of the Wisconsin
children were?
Are they too being
biologically primed
for more difficulties in life?
And if they are,
what can be done?
Humans are resilient organisms
and studies show that
negative epigenetic effects
need not be permanent.
Dolinoy:
Unlike a genetic mutation,
which we can do
nothing about,
an epigenetic change
we may be able to
do something about.
Narrator:
When Dana Dolinoy
fed her pregnant yellow
obese mice an enriched diet,
they gave birth to healthy,
brown slender pups.
The right environment
was able to reverse the effects
of a chemically induced
epigenetic change.
And Michael Meaney
was able to reverse
the epigenetic effects of his
nervous, low-licked rat pups.
Meaney:
At the time of weaning,
we put them into
enriched circumstances
similar to a daycare
environment.
And we then studied
these animals in adulthood
and when we looked,
we found that in fact, there was
a huge effect of enrichment.
Narrator:
The low-licked rats
in this study behaved more
like high-licked rats,
exploring their surroundings
with more assurance
and less fear.
The enriched environment
induced new changes
to the epigenome,
which overcame the effects
of their early epigenetic
programming.
The research led to a key
new understanding
of how the genome works.
While genes never change,
the epigenome can,
at key points in life,
be remarkably plastic,
adapting to individual
experiences
and changing social conditions.
Epigenetic changes have been
linked to adverse environments
associated with
a host of ill effects -
anxiety...
depression...
poor learning...
obesity and even cancers.
They can change
the course of a child's life.
a growing number
of scientists,
the implications
of these findings are clear.
Miranda:
At some point or another
we need to decide
as a country
that we will not tolerate one
out of five children
growing up in poverty.
That we have to invest
in our children.
We do have
the responsibility
to try to mitigate
against these effects.
I think it means strengthening
our schools.
I think it means
universal pre-K.
We have got to do something
to create more protective
environments for our children.
Narrator:
The evidence from Wisconsin
and other studies suggests
that children do better
when their families
and communities do better.
Assuring all children safe,
stable and nurturing conditions
could leave a profound
biological imprint,
increasing their chances
for better mental
and physical health
and for more resilient
and successful lives.
Meaney:
We know, for example,
that when populations move
into more favorable
circumstances,
when populations are freed
somewhat from oppression,
politically and socially,
that they become healthier.
Narrator:
The question
for the United States is -
how can we create
environments
that enrich the lives
of all young children,
and their families, allowing
them the opportunity
to realize their full
human potential?
Miranda:
Our obligation in this situation
is to be optimistic,
to say the science is helping us
to understand this better.
The science is giving us
more opportunities
for creative interventions
that can lead to better
outcomes for children,
and you just have to keep
working at it,
and working at it,
and working at it
and trying to be optimistic
that we can change outcomes
for children.
Meany:
There are going
to be constraints.
But in large measure,
we can engineer environments
that make individuals healthier,
happier, more prosperous
and more productive.
And there's a very
real biology to that.